Add a otelcol.processor.transform component (#5337)
grafana/agent: docs/sources/flow/reference/components/otelcol.processor.transform.md

This example will set the attribute "body" to the value of the log body:

```river
otelcol.processor.transform "default" {
  error_mode = "ignore"

  log_statements {
    context = "log"
    statements = [
      "set(attributes[\"body\"], body)",
    ]
  }

  output {
    metrics = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    logs    = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    traces  = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
  }
}
```

Note that each `"` was [escaped][river-strings] with `\"` inside the River string.

### Combine two attributes

This example will set attribute "test" to the value of attributes "foo" and "bar" combined.

```river
otelcol.processor.transform "default" {
  error_mode = "ignore"

  trace_statements {
    context = "resource"
    statements = [
      // The Concat function combines any number of strings, separated by a delimiter.
      "set(attributes[\"test\"], Concat([attributes[\"foo\"], attributes[\"bar\"]], \" \"))",
    ]
  }

  output {
    metrics = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    logs    = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    traces  = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
  }
}
```

> Note that each `"` was [escaped][river-strings] with `\"` inside the River string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each `"` is [escaped][river-strings] with `\"` inside the River string.
```

### Parsing JSON logs

> Given the following json body...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given the following JSON body:
```

```json
{
  "name": "log",
  "attr1": "foo",
  "attr2": "bar",
  "nested": {
    "attr3": "example"
  }
}
```

> ... add specific fields as attributes on the log:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can add specific fields as attributes on the log:
```

```river
otelcol.processor.transform "default" {
  error_mode = "ignore"

  log_statements {
    context = "log"

    statements = [
      // Parse body as JSON and merge the resulting map with the cache map, ignoring non-json bodies.
      // cache is a field exposed by OTTL that is a temporary storage place for complex operations.
      "merge_maps(cache, ParseJSON(body), \"upsert\") where IsMatch(body, \"^\\\\{\") ",
  
      // Set attributes using the values merged into cache.
      // If the attribute doesn't exist in cache then nothing happens.
      "set(attributes[\"attr1\"], cache[\"attr1\"])",
      "set(attributes[\"attr2\"], cache[\"attr2\"])",
  
      // To access nested maps you can chain index ([]) operations.
      // If nested or attr3 do no exist in cache then nothing happens.
      "set(attributes[\"nested.attr3\"], cache[\"nested\"][\"attr3\"])",
    ]
  }

  output {
    metrics = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    logs    = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    traces  = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
  }
}
```

> Note that some values in the River strings were [escaped][river-strings]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some values in the River strings are [escaped][river-strings]:
```

    ]
  }

  metric_statements {
    context = "datapoint"
    statements = [
      "limit(attributes, 100, [\"host.name\"])",
      "truncate_all(attributes, 4096)",
      "convert_sum_to_gauge() where metric.name == \"system.processes.count\"",
      "convert_gauge_to_sum(\"cumulative\", false) where metric.name == \"prometheus_metric\"",
    ]
  }

  log_statements {
    context = "resource"
    statements = [
      "keep_keys(attributes, [\"service.name\", \"service.namespace\", \"cloud.region\"])",
    ]
  }

  log_statements {
    context = "log"
    statements = [
      "set(severity_text, \"FAIL\") where body == \"request failed\"",
      "replace_all_matches(attributes, \"/user/*/list/*\", \"/user/{userId}/list/{listId}\")",
      "replace_all_patterns(attributes, \"value\", \"/account/\\\\d{4}\", \"/account/{accountId}\")",
      "set(body, attributes[\"http.route\"])",
    ]
  }

  output {
    metrics = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    logs    = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    traces  = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
  }
}

otelcol.exporter.otlp "default" {
  client {
    endpoint = env("OTLP_ENDPOINT")
  }
}
```

> Note that some values in the River strings were [escaped][river-strings]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some values in the River strings were [escaped][river-strings]:
```

- /docs/grafana-cloud/monitor-infrastructure/agent/flow/reference/components/otelcol.processor.transform/
- /docs/grafana-cloud/monitor-infrastructure/integrations/agent/flow/reference/components/otelcol.processor.transform/
canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/agent/latest/flow/reference/components/otelcol.processor.transform/
labels:
  stage: experimental
title: otelcol.processor.transform
description: Learn about otelcol.processor.transform
---

# otelcol.processor.transform

{{< docs/shared lookup="flow/stability/experimental.md" source="agent" version="<AGENT VERSION>" >}}

`otelcol.processor.transform` accepts telemetry data from other `otelcol`
components and modifies it using the [OpenTelemetry Transformation Language (OTTL)][OTTL].
OTTL statements consist of [OTTL functions][], which act on paths.
A path is a reference to a telemetry data such as:
* Resource attributes.
* Instrumentation scope name.
* Span attributes.

In addition to the [standard OTTL functions][OTTL functions], 
there is also a set of metrics-only functions:
* [convert_sum_to_gauge][]
* [convert_gauge_to_sum][]
* [convert_summary_count_val_to_sum][]
* [convert_summary_sum_val_to_sum][]

> [OTTL][] statements can also contain constructs such as:

Author: I agree! I deleted the "such as" from the bullet points and only left the one on this line.

> [OTTL][] statements can also contain constructs such as:

Reviewer: Good catch. I skimmed over it when I reviewed earlier :-P  I'd opt for "for example" over "such as" in most cases... there are places where such as works though :-) (there's a use further down around line 69 that I'd leave in)

> * [Booleans][OTTL booleans] such as:

Reviewer 2: I wonder if each bullet here should just be the link without the examples. there's a lot more context and the same examples linked.

Author: I think for the "boolean expressions" the line is helpful:

> [Boolean Expressions][OTTL boolean expressions] consisting of a `where` followed by one or more booleans

But for the other two bullet points I agree - I'll just leave them as links.

[no-op]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NOP_(code)
[metrics data model]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main//specification/metrics/data-model.md
{{% /admonition %}}

## Usage

```river
otelcol.processor.transform "LABEL" {
  output {
    metrics = [...]
    logs    = [...]
    traces  = [...]
  }
}
```

## Arguments

`otelcol.processor.transform` supports the following arguments:

Name | Type | Description | Default | Required
---- | ---- | ----------- | ------- | --------
`error_mode` | `string` | How to react to errors if they occur while processing a statement. | `"propagate"` | no

The supported values for `error_mode` are:
* `ignore`: Ignore errors returned by statements and continue on to the next statement. This is the recommended mode.
* `propagate`: Return the error up the pipeline. This will result in the payload being dropped from the Agent.

## Blocks

The following blocks are supported inside the definition of
`otelcol.processor.transform`:

Hierarchy | Block | Description | Required
--------- | ----- | ----------- | --------

> output | [output][] | Configures where to send received telemetry data. | yes

Reviewer 2: you may want to reorder this table so it matches the order of the sections below.

* `scope`: Use when interacting only with OTLP instrumentation scope (for example, the name of the instrumentation scope).
* `metric`: Use when interacting only with individual OTLP metrics.
* `datapoint`: Use when interacting only with individual OTLP metric data points.

Refer to [OTTL Context][] for more information about how to use contexts.

### log_statements block

The `log_statements` block specifies statements which transform log telemetry signals. 
Multiple `log_statements` blocks can be specified.

Name | Type | Description | Default | Required
---- | ---- | ----------- | ------- | --------
`context` | `string` | OTTL Context to use when interpreting the associated statements. | | yes
`statements` | `list(string)` | A list of OTTL statements. | | yes

The supported values for `context` are:
* `resource`: Use when interacting only with OTLP resources (for example, resource attributes).
* `scope`: Use when interacting only with OTLP instrumentation scope (for example, the name of the instrumentation scope).
* `log`: Use when interacting only with OTLP logs.

See [OTTL Context][] for more information about how ot use contexts.

> ### OTTL Context

Reviewer 2: Consider putting this section in a shared .md if you think it will be needed on multiple components in the future.

Author: I think it's probably just going to be this component. If other components do need it, we could move it to a shared md at a later points when we do have that need.
